ADR 004: Multiple Genesis Modes (#4737)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-004-genesis-modes.md

# ADR 4: Multiple Genesis modes

## Changelog

- 07/26/2019: First draft

## Context

### Problem

> Currently, each some of the modules `GenesisState` are populated if the corresponding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, some of the modules `GenesisState` are populated only if the corresponding
```

object passed through the Genesis JSON is empty (_i.e_ as an empty array) or if it's
undefined or the value is zero.

> This leads to confussion as you migh pass a valid genesis file which contains zero/empty

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This leads to confussion as you might pass a valid genesis file which contains zero/empty
```

> values and have `InitGenenesis` perform this uncessesary check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values and have `InitGenenesis` perform this unnecessary check.
```

### Proposed Solution

The proposed solution is to have two ways of initializing the daemon:

1. **New (empty) chain**: the user provides the minimum amount of genesis fields required to
start a chain. The rest is loaded directly from the mandatory genesis parameters.
2. **Restarted chain**: the user provides all the fields from genesis.

If an empty chain from `1.` receives _any_ field that should be populated, the initialization

> of the app should `panic`. Same applies for `2.` if a single field is missing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the app should `panic`. Similarly, for `2.` if any field is missing the chain should panic.
```

The fields that are not required are the ones in general are checked with simulation

> invariants.

Reviewer 2: I'm confused by this sentence. reword?

## Decision

Add a flag `FlagPopulateGenesis = "populate-genesis"` on `server/start.go` that is

> passed to the `AppCreator` (eg: `NewSimApp` or `NewGaiaApp`) when `<app>d start` is called.

Reviewer 2: As explained in my other comment, I think all field autogeneration should be an explicitly seperate process/separate command. The reason it should be a separate command is that is would be performing a fundamentally different task than `init` which initializes the chain from genesis - this auto-filling should not start the chain or initialize the db etc.

Author: so basically you mean creating a command to Import + update + Export

Reviewer 2: correct - import the blank genesis file, make any updates required, then export back to the file <- all this wrapped neatly in a command

  // ...
  populateGenesis bool // flag for pupulating the genesis state from the mandatory fields on genesis.json
  // ...
}
```

```go
// ./baseapp/baseapp.go
func (app *BaseApp) setPopulateGenesis(populate bool) {
  app.populateGenesis = populate
}
```

The new flag is then used on the app `InitChainer` function, which calls:

```go
// add populateGenesis parameter
func (am AppModule) InitGenesis(ctx sdk.Context, populateGenesis bool, data json.RawMessage)
```

Then, every module has to be updated to follow each mode. For example, on `supply/genesis.go`,
[`InitGenesis`](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/0ba74bb4b77f465e4c661552381732d8612e7c0b/x/supply/genesis.go#L12)
needs to be modified to the following:

```go
func InitGenesis(ctx sdk.Context, keeper Keeper, ak types.AccountKeeper, populate bool, data GenesisState) {
  if populate {
    if !data.Supply.Total.Empty() {
      panic("total supply should be initialized with empty coins ('[]') on populate genesis mode")
    }

    ak.IterateAccounts(ctx,
      func(acc authtypes.Account) (stop bool) {
        data.Supply.Total = data.Supply.Total.Add(acc.GetCoins())
        return false
      },
    )

>   }

Reviewer: What happens on else clause?

Reviewer 2: Then it is expected that the data is already fully populated and it is simply set.

  keeper.SetSupply(ctx, data.Supply)
}
```

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

> - Reduce confusion when initialize genesis as now there're two clearly distinct

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Reduce confusion when initializing genesis as now there are two clearly distinct
```
lol fede that abbreviation doesn't exist (try saying out loud) :P

modes for it

### Negative

> 

Reviewer 2: There is one negative to the way this is setup which is that we don't really have an option to "partially" fill in the options (as ambiguous as that is) - we have that option now. I think the easiest solution for this is to create an easy way to the genesis to be auto-completed (option `1.`) and then re-exported before starting the chain, this way it gives the user a chance to fully review all the auto-generated fields and or modify some of them before actually starting the chain. To me, this sounds like the appropriate process flow generally - we should probably _only_ start the chain if all the fields are populated (option `2.`) if you want to the auto-complete the genesis (also perform a genesis validity check) those should be separate commands on the CLI.

# ADR 4: Multiple Genesis modes

## Changelog

- July 26, 2019: Initial draft

## Context

> ### Problem

Reviewer 3: It's not clear to me after reading this section what the actual problem is? Maybe provide an example?

Currently, some of the modules `GenesisState` are populated only if the corresponding
object passed through the Genesis JSON is empty (_i.e_ as an empty array) or if it's
undefined or the value is zero.

This leads to confusion as you might pass a valid genesis file which contains zero/empty

> values and have `InitGenenesis` perform this unnecessary check.

Reviewer 3: `unnecessary check`? You mean unnecessary initialization?

> ### Proposed Solution

Reviewer 3: Perhaps it's best to join the "Proposal" with what's outlined in the "Decision".

> The proposed solution is to add a command to update a genesis file with the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We propose to add a command to update a genesis file with the
```

# ADR 4: Multiple Genesis modes

## Changelog

- Sept 3, 2019: Initial draft

## Context

> In the current SDK, when the `GenesisState` is initialized through a `InitGenesis` call, some of the `GenesisState` fields are loaded from a `genesis.json` file, whereas in other cases they are initialized (_i.e_ populated) if the corresponding object value from JSON is empty, undefined or its value is zero.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the SDK, when the `GenesisState` is initialized through a `InitGenesis` call, some of the `GenesisState` fields are loaded from a `genesis.json` file, whereas in other cases they are initialized (_i.e_ populated) if the corresponding object value from JSON is empty, undefined or its value is zero.
```

> This may lead to confusion because as is currently programmed, `InitGenesis`

Reviewer 3: I still don't understand the problem or context here? I took a look at every single `InitGenesis` method and all it does is takes input genesis state and sets the corresponding values/params on the respective keeper.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I'm not sure this paragraph makes total sense. I think what is intended to be said is that existing genesis will populate existing fields even if they were accidentally left out, which can be problematic

> initializes _and_ loads the values at the same time. When in reallity they should be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
initializes _and_ loads the values at the same time. When in reality they should be
```

> two separated disctinct processes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
two separated distinct processes.
```

> A recurring case of this problem is to check if a balance is empty and initialize it

Reviewer 3: This is specific to supply and supply only, yet there is no mention of supply in the context before this. This ADR seems to be directly aimed at irregularities within `x/supply` _only_.

Reviewer 2: I think that this is relevant to other modules as well. Even just using empty or default values for what is held in the `Minter` for instance

if not (by iterating the state). This affects mostly the total [`Supply`](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/13e5e18d77e6010a4566ce187f18207669345419/x/supply/genesis.go#L14-L24) and[`ModuleAccounts`](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/13e5e18d77e6010a4566ce187f18207669345419/x/gov/genesis.go#L44-L50)
within each module.

## Decision

We propose to add a separate command to update a genesis file with the missing values/fields for each module `GenesisState`.

With this command, the user provides a `genesis.json` file with the minimum amount
of genesis fields required to start a chain. The rest is loaded directly from the
mandatory genesis parameters. In general, the genesis fields that are populated
are the ones checked by the simulation invariants.

If the given genesis file contains _any_ field that shouldn't be populated, the
execution should `panic` and exit. Similarly, the initialization of the app (_i.e_

> `<app>d init`) should `panic` if any genesis field is undefined.

Reviewer 2: I agree with this simplicity in design. The blockchain developer obviously needs to have the capacity to modify what populatable fields are and by which logic they are populated.

The flow of this process can be summarized in 3 steps:

  1. Import genesis file with missing fields

>   2. Create the app and initialize genesis with flag to fill the missing values

Reviewer 2: I think this point is misleading, because we're not really creating the app. If we do need to create the app it's only as a temporary app whereby we can use this app to help populate missing genesis fields. I think it would be less ambiguous to say something like:

```suggestion
  2. Populate the missing genesis values according to application/module logic. 
```

Author: correct. It is a temporary `abci.Application`, created by the `server.AppCreator` function and then immediately exported with a `server.AppExporter` function.

>   3. Export updated genesis file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  3. Export updated genesis file intended to be used for further usage with the `<app>d init` command
```

  }
}
```

We also need to add a flag `FlagPopulateGenesis = "populate-genesis"` on
`server/start.go` that is passed to the `AppCreator` (eg: `NewSimApp` or `NewGaiaApp`)
when the `start` command from the daemon is run. This tells the app to fill the
missing genesis properties with the mandatory fields:

```go
app := NewSimApp(logger, db, nil, true, 0, SetPopulateGenesis(populate))
```

Additionally, a new option function needs to be passed as parameter to `BaseApp` during its initialization:

```go
// ./baseapp/options.go
//
// SetPopulateGenesis sets an option to populate or not the missing values
// of the each module GenesisState from the mandatory fields given on the genesis file
func SetPopulateGenesis(pupulateGenesis bool) func(*BaseApp) {
  return func(bap *BaseApp) { bap.setPopulateGenesis(pupulateGenesis)}
}
```

Which requires the following additions to `BaseApp`:

```go
// ./baseapp/baseapp.go
type BaseApp struct {
  // ...
  populateGenesis bool // flag for pupulating the genesis state from the mandatory fields on genesis.json
  // ...
}

func (app *BaseApp) setPopulateGenesis(pupulateGenesis bool) {
  app.populateGenesis = pupulateGenesis
}
```

> Finally, the `pupulate-genesis` command imports the provided genesis dile and passes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, the `populate-genesis` command imports the provided genesis file and passes
```

the parameter to the module `Manager` call to update the state and then export it:

```go
// TODO: params
func PopulateCmd(ctx *Context, appCreator server.AppCreator, appExporter server.AppExporter) *cobra.Command {
    cmd := &cobra.Command{

>     Use:   "pupulate-genesis [path/to/genesis.json]",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Use:   "populate-genesis [path/to/genesis.json]",
```

    Short: "Fill the missing non-mandatory values from the genesis file",
    Long:  `Fill the missing non-mandatory values from the genesis file by
    iterating the state`,
    Args:  cobra.ExactArgs(1),
    RunE: func(_ *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
      // initialize args
      genFile = args[0]
      genFile := config.GenesisFile()

      if appCreator == nil {
        return errors.New("app creator constructor function cannot be undefined")
      }

      if appExporter == nil {
        return errors.New("app exporter function cannot be undefined")
      }

      // 1. Import genesis file with missing fields
      appState, err := codec.MarshalJSONIndent(cdc, mbm.DefaultGenesis())
      if err != nil {
        return errors.Wrap(err, "Failed to marshall default genesis state")
      }

      genDoc := &types.GenesisDoc{}
      if _, err := os.Stat(genFile); err != nil {
        if !os.IsNotExist(err) {
          return err
        }
      } else {
        genDoc, err = types.GenesisDocFromFile(genFile)
        if err != nil {
          return errors.Wrap(err, "Failed to read genesis doc from file")
        }
      }

>       // 2. Create the app and initialize genesis with flag to fill missing values

Reviewer 2: ditto to my previous comment on this wording

      cfg := ctx.Config
      home := cfg.RootDir
      traceWriterFile := viper.GetString(flagTraceStore)

      db, err := openDB(home)
      if err != nil {
        return nil, err
      }

      traceWriter, err := openTraceWriter(traceWriterFile)
      if err != nil {
        return nil, err
      }

      // CONTRACT: baseapp must have the option to populate the genesis

>       app := appCreator(ctx.Logger, db, traceWriter)

Reviewer 2: I'm confused by this function or why we need to populate the app. This is module manager functionality is it not? We really only need to the BasicModuleManager provided by the app

Author: we need to call `app.mm.InitGenesis(ctx, genesisState)` which is called when the app is created through an `AppCreator`, which is application-agnostic (eg not necessarily `SimApp` or `GaiaApp`).

Reviewer 2: ok

      // 3. Export updated genesis file
      appState, validators, err := appExporter(ctx.Logger, db, traceWriter, -1, false, []string{})
      if err != nil {
        return fmt.Errorf("error exporting state: %v", err)
      }

      doc, err := tmtypes.GenesisDocFromFile(ctx.Config.GenesisFile())
      if err != nil {
        return err
      }

      doc.AppState = appState
      doc.Validators = validators

      encoded, err := codec.MarshalJSONIndent(cdc, doc)
      if err != nil {
        return err
      }

      fmt.Println(string(sdk.MustSortJSON(encoded)))
      return nil
    }

    return cmd
}
```

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

- Reduce confusion when initializing the app, as now you can only provide a genesis file with all its fields defined.
- Add a command to populate a genesis file from the mandatory values.

### Negative

> - The chain now only starts if all the fields of the genesis file are populated.

Reviewer 2: I would say that this is a positive. No accidental startups

## Decision

We propose separate the initialialization from the population of the genesis
values into two separated distinct processes by adding a separate command to
update a genesis file with the missing values/fields for each module `GenesisState`.

With this command, the user provides a `genesis.json` file with the minimum amount
of genesis fields required to start a chain. The rest is loaded directly from the
mandatory genesis parameters. In general, the genesis fields that are populated
are the ones checked by the simulation invariants.

If the given genesis file contains _any_ field that shouldn't be populated, the
execution should `panic` and exit. Similarly, the initialization of the app (_i.e_
`<app>d init`) should `panic` if any genesis field is undefined.

The flow of this process can be summarized in 3 steps:

  1. Import genesis file with missing fields
  2. Populate the missing genesis values according to application/module logic.
  3. Export updated genesis file intended to be used for further usage with the
  `<app>d init` command

> To archieve this, every module needs to be able to generate the missing fields

Reviewer 5: s/archieve/achieve/g

# ADR 004: Genesis Modes

## Changelog

- Sept 3, 2019: Initial draft

> ## Context

Reviewer 3: @fedekunze I synced with @rigelrozanski and updated the context. Let me know if this is inline with your thinking.

```go
func InitGenesis(ctx sdk.Context, ak AccountKeeper, data GenesisState) {
  ak.SetParams(ctx, data.Params)
  data.Accounts = SanitizeGenesisAccounts(data.Accounts)

  for _, a := range data.Accounts {
    acc := ak.NewAccount(ctx, a)
    ak.SetAccount(ctx, acc)
  }
}
```

However, some modules, in addition to setting parameters and values from genesis state,
also _modify_ the genesis state implicitly when certain values are not provided.
At the time of this ADR's draft, this only happens when module accounts are not
provided in the genesis application state.

Example from `x/gov`:

```go
func InitGenesis(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, supplyKeeper types.SupplyKeeper, data GenesisState) {
  // ...

  // add coins if not provided on genesis
  if moduleAcc.GetCoins().IsZero() {
    if err := moduleAcc.SetCoins(totalDeposits); err != nil {
      panic(err)
    }
  
    supplyKeeper.SetModuleAccount(ctx, moduleAcc)
  }
}
```

This kind of business logic in `InitGenesis` is not desirable because it modifies
genesis state without explicitly doing so and as a result can lead to bugs, irregularities,
and a confusing UX if the user is not aware of these implicit modifications.

> ## Decision

Reviewer 3: I have not read through the entirety of the `Decision`, but from the looks of it, it seems quite verbose and overly complicated. In addition, I have no idea why we're modifying BaseApp. We should really avoid doing so if possible.

From the chat I had with @rigelrozanski the solution here should be pretty simple:

- Update the `AppModuleGenesis` interface to also now include `PopulateGenesis` with very clear documentation on what this does.
- Create a  generic `populate-genesis` command that goes through each module in a genesis file and calls `PopulateGenesis` on each module and returns the resulting genesis state.

Users, therefore, have the ability to "opt-in" into this functionality. In addition, we have the ability to this programmatically (via looping and calling PopulateGenesis) which will be useful for simulation and exporting and manually (via a command). Thoughts?
